Wi-Fi Connection
================

Let’s now get this power outlet on a Wi-Fi network. In this Chapter we
will connect to a hard-coded Wi-Fi network that is embedded within the
device’s firmware executable image. You may refer to the
*3\_wifi\_connection/* directory of esp-jumpstart for looking at this
code.

Wi-Fi is a protocol that can generate asynchronous events like
connectivity lost, connection established, DHCP Address received etc.
For this, we register a handler with the Wi-Fi and network subsystem.
This handler will get called whenever either of these asynchronous
events occurs.

The Code
--------

.. code:: c

    #include <esp_wifi.h>
    #include <esp_event_loop.h>

    tcpip_adapter_init();
    esp_event_loop_init(event_handler, NULL);

    wifi_init_config_t cfg = WIFI_INIT_CONFIG_DEFAULT();
    esp_wifi_init(&cfg);
    esp_wifi_set_mode(WIFI_MODE_STA);

    wifi_config_t wifi_config = {
        .sta = {
            .ssid = EXAMPLE_ESP_WIFI_SSID,
            .password = EXAMPLE_ESP_WIFI_PASS,
        },
     };
    esp_wifi_set_config(ESP_IF_WIFI_STA, &wifi_config);
    esp_wifi_start();

In the above code:

-  We initialize the TCP/IP stack with the *tcpip\_adapter\_init()* call

-  Similarly, the Wi-Fi subsystem and its station interface is
   initialized with the calls to *esp\_wifi\_init()* and
   *esp\_wifi\_set\_mode()*

-  Finally, the hard-coded SSID and passphrase configuration of the
   target Wi-Fi network are configured and we start the station using a
   call to *esp\_wifi\_start()*

The call to *esp\_event\_loop\_init()* is important. The event loop
collects events from the TCP/IP Stack and the Wi-Fi subsystem. It
delivers these events to the callback that is registered through the
first parameter.

The asynchronous event handler that is registered with the event loop
can be implemented as:

.. code:: c

    esp_err_t event_handler(void *ctx, system_event_t *event)
    {
        switch(event->event_id) {
        case SYSTEM_EVENT_STA_START:
            esp_wifi_connect();
            break;
        case SYSTEM_EVENT_STA_GOT_IP:
            ESP_LOGI(TAG, "Connected with IP Address:%s",  
                 ip4addr_ntoa(&event->event_info.got_ip.ip_info.ip));
            break;
        case SYSTEM_EVENT_STA_DISCONNECTED:
            esp_wifi_connect();
            break;
        return ESP_OK;
    }

The event handler current handles 3 events. When it receives an event
*SYSTEM\_EVENT\_STA\_START*, it asks the station interface to connect
using the *esp\_wifi\_connect()* call. The same action is taken even
when we receive a Wi-Fi disconnect event.

The event *SYSTEM\_EVENT\_STA\_GOT\_IP* is received when a DHCP IP
address is obtained by ESP32. In this particular case, we only print the
IP address on the console.

Progress so far
---------------

You can now modify the application to enter your Wi-Fi network’s SSID
and the passphrase. When you compile and flash this code on your
development board, the ESP32 should connect to your Wi-Fi network and
print the IP address on the console. The outlet’s functionality of
toggling the GPIO on pressing the push-button is, of course, also
retained.

One problem with this approach is that the Wi-Fi settings are hard-coded
into the firmware image. While this is ok for a hobby project, a product
will require the end-user to dynamically configure this device with
their settings. This is what we will look at in the next chapter.
